the current app development is
experiencing problems if we don't get it
working does it really matter will it
make a difference to prevent a second
wave does it really matter listen Andy
and yeah I think it doesn't matter and
you know very much supported the
government in trying to set this up
because if in the end if you get the app
up and running it will save lives the
problem is that the government were
warned repeatedly from the outset that
the path that they were taking was not
going to work because the technology
just wasn't compatible with a lot of
phones now there were other countries
like Germany and Australia who were
taking a similar path to our government
trying to develop their own technology
realize that it would listen to those
warnings and actually went down a
different path and as a result Germany
has just managed to launch their app
yesterday and it's quite confident about
how that's going to work so we've really
got to start breaking the pattern here
which is the government that shuts
people out doesn't listen to advice
doesn't seek to learn from expertise
here in the UK and overseas and then
finds later that they've got to revisit
those plans because they've unraveled
very very quickly we've seen it over and
over again with a whole host of things
one of the real outstanding problems
with all of this at the moment is that
you've got public health directors
across England saying that they still
don't get the GPS in local areas don't
get the results of tests because of
government set up their own private
sector testing facilities around the
country so GPS just simply don't know
when their patients I've been testing
tested positive for Covey's public
health directors are looking closely at
local outbreaks and having to make
decisions about managing local outbreaks
but because they're not getting that
information they just simply don't have
the tools that they need to do the job
so we need a reset here it's right for
the government to abandon a system if it
isn't working but we need to ask
ourselves why is it so often that we end
up having to unravel plants over and
over again because we didn't get them
right in the face
let's see if on to ask you in only what
you think about that this particular
question but also just tell us a little
bit about how you're managing at Crystal
Palace because you've got a kind of app
of your own there
haven't you yes it's not a tracing app I
mean I would get on the app it seems
incredible to me that so many countries
are developing their own app I mean I
would have thought certainly if the EU
has a purpose that that might be one
thing that they could have got
everybody's heads together on we all
want exactly the same app but have been
exactly the same thing which seems
incredible we have a very simple app
where the players and the staff fill in
any symptoms because that's as efficient
a way of catching the disease early
sometimes just testing where there can
be a lag between the time you test and
and and testing positive but you know
developing these apps is extremely
complex you know as somebody who had a
business that developed this kind of
thing the timescales that we're trying
to do it in a very very compressed I'm
pleased today but they're adapting to
Google and Apple technology which you
know I would hazard a guess they might
be better at producing stuffed and you
know people in our government so look
let's hope that we can all get together
the blame game on both sides I think
really does need to stop it's a very
difficult situation nobody was prepared
for the situation that you know we can
say Germany have done slightly less
worse than everybody else we will need
to look back well they've done a lot
better in terms of their death toll they
have done better in terms of their death
so but I think when we look back on this
10,000 deaths is too many you know this
this the for this to get to the extent
that it did into the amount of countries
that it has you know the world really
needs to look at it and make sure that
these kind of outbreaks are jumped on ye
before the kind of things we're
discussing now because we are talking
about a pandemic that is broadly out of
control in the world
that we're trying to get on top of and
it is going to be extremely difficult
and we do need to come together as a
country private enterprise the
government's both sides of the house and
try and find a solution in the next two
or three months or we really could be in
a terrible situation Mike you've had
your hand up from the start yeah so it's
going to say with Apple and Google
there's good parts in both applications
surely these companies could come
together for once you know because
there's a big panic pandemic going on
and sort of resource the resources
together well I think they are putting
their resources together for the
benefits
of this particular app as I understand
it Charles yes it just seems that this
is just another moment of government
bluster actually hitting reality so Matt
Hancock and Baroness Harding said today
that they backed both horses of the
Google and the Android model and the NHS
app but they've always insisted until
this point that they were only gonna
pursue the NHS app so it just seems that
the government are trying to make it
seem that they're trying to do the best
job possible but when it comes to
reality
they want to cover up and not pretend
that they've done anything wrong good
well I think that the app can only
really be an adjunct I think that there
are technological limitations in the app
in terms of providing a nationwide
service and really it's about having a
functioning public health infrastructure
that is able to deal with local
outbreaks locally and unfortunately the
government has chosen to centralize and
use a private company surco to take the
lead on this and I think that a lot of
public health officials and workers as
as Lisa said are frustrated that they're
not receiving the information they kind
of been shut out whether intentionally
or not I don't know but they do feel
that they've been shut out and that does
then limit us in terms of our ability to
do exactly what we're all asking for is
that as Steve said well where's that
can-do attitude can we crush this virus
so that society can get back to normal
and that kids can get back into school
and our businesses can get up and
running and a lot of the businesses and
the particular sectors that are looking
to get back frankly don't have much
confidence and what about your business
I mean getting line-of-duty I say that
as a unashamed fan after a confess
getting that back up and running well
it's interesting that you give that
specific example because we had an
outbreak during the the shoot over in
Belfast when there was the the test and
tray system originally the containment
phase and we were able to deal with that
and we were able to carry on
uninterrupted then towards the the end
of the
the shoot that got curtailed we had
another outbreak and I was quite
surprised to learn that we weren't able
to do testing and tracing that the
system had been stopped and that was the
point where really when we we looked at
it we knew that we couldn't protect our
workforce and we had to stop and that
was nine days before the lockdown so the
writing was on the wall then and I think
a lot of businesses are just going to
take responsibility for it themselves I
think that that each TV production will
organize their own testing and they will
look after each other and do their best
that way James D'Arcy we had the
announcement today from the health
secretary about switching horses I think
was the analogy that Han court used
having but he also said we backed both
horses throughout the NHS X app and also
this other app kind of Google Apple app
what I don't understand that that is if
if the government has been backing both
those things it's now jettisoned one why
isn't the other one ready
well the I mean these apps we talked
about I mean Lisa implies there was an
obvious right answer they clearly wasn't
an obvious right backing them both and
other countries are already introducing
interrupts how come the other one isn't
ready so the idea that there was an
obvious right answer is is wrong
otherwise every country in the world
would've done the same thing that's not
what happened Germany as an example and
what Matt did was exactly the right
thing to do which is not to put all our
eggs in one basket to make sure that we
were developing the the the in-house app
as it were and the and the and the app
through third parties yes it was and it
was tested on the Isle of Wight and the
decision was made to go with the to go
with the the other option that's the
right thing to do it's about learning as
we go through this and making the
decision I don't know exactly when the
app will go live because we heard it
might not be to a winter but to say I
don't want to guess inspect I don't know
exactly when the app will go live but
obviously we will continue working with
international friends and partners we
will learn from what other countries are
doing and we are the whole world is
learning as we go and to make sure that
we bring about a test and trace app that
can be it can be used to to protect us
all
Gareth do we do not think that the
public are going to see this as another
u-turn again and it's gonna be even
harder to get public or to Asakusa
when it does become like why do you
worry about that a lot lots of public
confidence no cause I mean we use the
word you turn it and I was in business
before I came into into politics and if
you're gonna test a couple of options
see which one progresses best see which
one works and then and then invest your
time effort in the better performing one
of those options that's not a u-turn
that's why it was tested on the Isle of
Wight okay that's why we are we you know
we learn from the experience you have
been silently on the other rocks on the
Isle of Wight as well
no but the point no you haven't the
point that Matt was saying is no no I
just want to be is now I really don't
understand so if if if Matt Hancock said
you were backing both options and you
were trialing the NHS X Act kazumi were
trialing the other one as well otherwise
that's what backing both options is no
that's no no that's so that the test of
our in-house at was done the Isle of
Wight we were keeping our options open
they see you have a child the other one
the other system is being being used
more widely so doing a discreet UK only
trial for that one my understanding and
I'm because it's being used elsewhere
right there's not necessary it's not
necessary for us to to trial both but
the reason we were trialing is to make
sure that we chose the best option
because each option have their
advantages and disadvantages and there's
not it was not clear-cut at the start of
this process that the the that this
would be the better option that's why
you test yeah I can't overstate how
important getting tests and trace right
and getting it right as quickly as
possible is everybody who's watching
this evening is desperate to try and get
back to some say
of normality without a robust
operational test and tray system it's
impossible to be able to do that safely
we have to be able to find every case
and isolate it and and keep and suppress
this virus what is very clear to me is
when I had a conversation with the
deputy chief medical officer on the 13th
of March it was around then that we
stopped routinely testing and tracing
every incident incidence of corona virus
and I questioned her heart and I said
why are you stopping the testing we
should be testing every case and it was
down to capacity and it been far too
late it was some weeks after that that
we suddenly saw a focus on ramping up
testing and great we've got the capacity
but James we haven't had for almost a
month now the figures of how many people
have actually been tested on a daily
basis and on tracing as Lisa has said we
need to be working much more closely
with with local authorities directors of
Public Health have been crying out to be
leading this effort they are the experts
I didn't watch the Solsbury poisonings
earlier this week but I heard in there
it showed just how pivotal the role of
the Director of Public Health is that is
what they should be doing that's what
they're experts in and they should be
leading those teams of contact tracers
to be tracing every case but last week I
was talking to some leaders in local
government they haven't got the data
they haven't got the tools that there's
still to some extent unclear about what
their role should be and this is
absolutely critical if we want to open
up our economy again like I think it's
telling that you got an honest answer
about the reason that testing was
abandoned in March what we were told the
public was told was that it wasn't
appropriate for an economy of our size
well I think our institutions I feel you
know we talked about the government all
the time letting us down but you know
public health England made that decision
in Germany they devolved it very quickly
into the local authorities and I would
also say I mean we can't have the whole
of the United Kingdom hanging on an app
developer developing an app you know
test and trace is possible to do man
most of it judges you said will happen
manually even with the app the app is 15
minutes in proximity to meters December
it's just an adjunct with somebody for
the whole linear structure yeah so you
know we need to get tests and tracks
rolled out manually and if the app comes
along and helps us do it then great but
we can't wait for that but it's also
about people receiving accurate
information when you have public health
officials when you have government
scientists saying things which are
manifestly untrue which is that it
wasn't appropriate it was actually
always about resources but they didn't
admit that and so now we're in a
situation again where Trust has broken
down people are desperate to get good
quality information they can rely on
from their government from their public
health officials so that people can make
the right decisions and make the right
calculations about risk about how we get
back to normal the blame game I think
the public appreciate that we are in an
unprecedented situation and no
government is going to get it right but
the thing that frustrates me most about
this government is that they just don't
have the humility to put their hands up
when they've actually got it wrong it's
a u-turn they are holding their that was
saying they got it wrong and then
they're told it's a u-turn so then
that's not an environment that's
conducive to people making the right
decisions is it but is the blame game
that's exactly what no but there a
difference between making a u-turn on
policy and just lying there's a
difference between those two well I
certainly think that the information as
you just pointed out that they've
received from some of our institution
the scientists and I'm not here to
defend the blindly everybody's made
terrible mistakes you know where there
was a left turn to make we took the
right one in almost every occasion and
we have to learn from it but I don't
think when we look back there'll be any
one single reason you know you're
absolutely right and I think we have to
consider that when we move forward and
that's the most important thing is how
we move forward moving forward involves
learning from your mistakes and being
honest and unfortunately there's that
gap between the learning behavior and
the transmission of the information
about what has
been learned and where mistakes were
made and I think that that is is
problematic for people to have
confidence about the information they
receive and how they go forward
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dog code at UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News